## Murti worship ##

Here is a [Dvaita interpretation](https://in.groups.yahoo.com/neo/groups/SUMADHWASEVA/conversations/topics/3473?l=1) of _na tasya pratimā asti_


     > Can you please clarify clarify the following verses regarding the idol worship and nature?

I had seen these verses close to a decade ago, in some pages on the
internet, claimed to be authored by some A.B.Vidyarthi. I have
forgotten what A.B. expands to, but it is a muslim name. He used some
verses in isolation (it is more like desolation) to show that _even_
the Vedic scripture disallows iconic worship. I wasn't (and still am
not) sure what his purpose was. Did he want to confuse hindus, to
later convert them? And his translation was sufficient to create a
confusion? He also quoted some purANic texts that extolled Prophet
Mohammed, but on actual reading, one would find that Kalidasa is
actually scolding this leader of mlechchaas in no uncertain terms!
Ofcourse, nobody ever has quoted Kalidasa's mention in the purANas. So
much for the validity of those quotes.

    > It is mentioned in Shwetashvatara Upanishad
    > “Na tasya pratima asti”
    > “There is no likeness (or image) of Him”.
    > (Shwetashvatara Upanishad 4:19)
    > Yajurveda Chapter 32, verse 3 also says same.

Na tasya pratimA asti yasya nAma mahadyashaH means there is nobody
like the great glorious Vishnu - which is just fine. Ekameva advitIyaM
brahma. There is none paralled to him. One cannot take the above line
to mean the scriptures condemn idol worship. The bhagavata propounds
worship in a pratIka. pratIka is a symbol, a place that can serve as
an adhiSThAna for bhagavanta. The Lord sanctions some pratIkas:

sUryo.agnirbrAhmaNA gAvo vaishhNavaH khaM marujjalam.h |
bhUrAtmA sarvabhUtAni bhadra pUjApadAni me

The subsequent verse says that vAyu is the main pratIka. There are,
ofcourse, other purANas and tantra texts that give the details on
size, shapes of pratimAs.

However some might contend that the purANAs are later texts, and by
whose time of composition, idol worship was accepted; but that the
Vedas do not prescribe idol worship. But that too is not true. Lakshmi
is said to be ghRita-pratIka (she, who is symbolized by ghrita ghee)
in the veda. Acharya refers to the verses in Rgveda and Taittariya
brahmana where this occurs. If the above line gives an instance where
a jaDa is considered pratIka for a sentient deity, there are many
other lines in the veda where one sentient is said to be pratimA of
another. Consider the account in shatapatha where prajApati (Rudra) is
said to be the pratIka of Brahma (samvatsara): saMvatsara ityAtmano
hyetam pratimAmasR^ijata yadveva caturakSharaH saMvatsarashca!
turakSharaH prajApatisteno haiva _asya eSha pratimA_ . Thus one can
find enough places in the Veda too where a notion of using either jaDa
(like in piShTapashu) or a chetana (like vAyu being vishiShTa-pratimA
of the Supreme Being) as a place of adhiShThAna. How else can one
account for lines such as: yasya pratIkamAhutaM ghRtena. As such as,
many procedures for a yajna that are detailed in brAhmaNa texts (and
subsequently in grihya or smritis) do involve worship of a pratIka for
a particular devata. So it is impossible to hold that Vedas do not
propound idol worship.

    > It is mentioned in Yajurveda Chapter 40 verse 8
    > “He is bodiless and pure”.
    > (Yajurveda 40:8)

This is the Ishavasya Upanishad. We give a better interpretation of
'shuddaM akAyaM avR^iNam'. Please see the translation in the
downloadable at http://www.dvaita.net . If 'akAyaM' is literally
interpreted as bodiless, it is contradictory to later use phrases like
'kalyANatamaM rUpaM' (most auspicious form).

    > iii. Yajurved Chapter 40 Verse 9
    > It is mentioned in Yajurved
    > “Andhatma pravishanti ye assambhuti mupaste”
    > “They enter darkness, those who worship natural things.”
    > E.g. worship of natural elements air, water, fire, etc.
    > (Yajurveda 40:9)
    > It further continues and says
    > “They sink deeper in darkness those who worship sambhuti i.e. created things”
    > E.g. created things such as table, chair, idols, etc.

What a stupid translation. Why then in further verse, does the veda
say: sambhUtyA amR^itaM ashnute? He attains immortality through
created things? Please see the above link for the correct
interpretation.

Regards,
Krishna


===============

The referenced verses cited can be found here:

Lakṣmī as ghṛtam (ghee)

[RV_07.008.01.1{11}](http://fiindolo.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/1_veda/1_sam/1_rv/rv_07_u.htm)         indhe rājā samaryo namobhiryasya pratīkamāhutaṃ ghṛtena

[sāmaveda 1 1 2 0708a](http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/1_veda/1_sam/samavedu.htm) indhe rājā samaryo namobhiryasya pratīkamāhutaṃ ghṛtena (1.70)

Rudra is the pratimā of Brahma

[śatapatha 11.1.6.13](http://fiindolo.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/1_veda/2_bra/satapath/sb_11_u.htm)
 tasmādāhuḥ prajāpatiḥ saṃvatsara ityātmano hyetam pratimāmasṛjata yadveva
caturakṣaraḥ saṃvatsaraśca! turakṣaraḥ prajāpatisteno haivāsyaiṣa pratimā

[chāndogya upaniṣad 6.2.1](http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/1_veda/4_upa/chup___u.htm) ekam evādvitīyaṃ
